1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 7;10:321.

Discovering multiple realistic TFBS motifs based on a generalized model.

Chan TM, Li G, Leung KS, Lee KH.

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, N, T,, Hong Kong. tmchan@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

BACKGROUND: Identification of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) is a
central problem in Bioinformatics on gene regulation. de novo motif discovery
serves as a promising way to predict and better understand TFBSs for biological
verifications. Real TFBSs of a motif may vary in their widths and their
conservation degrees within a certain range. Deciding a single motif width by
existing models may be biased and misleading. Additionally, multiple, possibly
overlapping, candidate motifs are desired and necessary for biological
verification in practice. However, current techniques either prohibit overlapping
TFBSs or lack explicit control of different motifs. RESULTS: We propose a new
generalized model to tackle the motif widths by considering and evaluating a
width range of interest simultaneously, which should better address the width
uncertainty. Moreover, a meta-convergence framework for genetic algorithms (GAs),
is proposed to provide multiple overlapping optimal motifs simultaneously in an
effective and flexible way. Users can easily specify the difference amongst
expected motif kinds via similarity test. Incorporating Genetic Algorithm with
Local Filtering (GALF) for searching, the new GALF-G (G for generalized)
algorithm is proposed based on the generalized model and meta-convergence
framework. CONCLUSION: GALF-G was tested extensively on over 970 synthetic, real 
and benchmark datasets, and is usually better than the state-of-the-art methods. 
The range model shows an increase in sensitivity compared with the single-width
ones, while providing competitive precisions on the E. coli benchmark.
Effectiveness can be maintained even using a very small population, exhibiting
very competitive efficiency. In discovering multiple overlapping motifs in a real
liver-specific dataset, GALF-G outperforms MEME by up to 73% in overall F-scores.
GALF-G also helps to discover an additional motif which has probably not been
annotated in the dataset. http://www.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/%7Etmchan/GALFG/


PMCID: PMC2770069
PMID: 19811641 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. DNA Res. 2009 Oct;16(5):261-73. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Exhaustive search for over-represented DNA sequence motifs with CisFinder.

Sharov AA, Ko MS.

Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We present CisFinder software, which generates a comprehensive list of motifs
enriched in a set of DNA sequences and describes them with position frequency
matrices (PFMs). A new algorithm was designed to estimate PFMs directly from
counts of n-mer words with and without gaps; then PFMs are extended over gaps and
flanking regions and clustered to generate non-redundant sets of motifs. The
algorithm successfully identified binding motifs for 12 transcription factors
(TFs) in embryonic stem cells based on published chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing data. Furthermore, CisFinder successfully identified alternative
binding motifs of TFs (e.g. POU5F1, ESRRB, and CTCF) and motifs for known and
unknown co-factors of genes associated with the pluripotent state of ES cells.
CisFinder also showed robust performance in the identification of motifs that
were only slightly enriched in a set of DNA sequences.


PMCID: PMC2762409
PMID: 19740934 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Comput Biol. 2009 Feb;16(2):317-29.

GADEM: a genetic algorithm guided formation of spaced dyads coupled with an EM
algorithm for motif discovery.

Li L.

Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. li3@niehs.nih.gov

Genome-wide analyses of protein binding sites generate large amounts of data; a
ChIP dataset might contain 10,000 sites. Unbiased motif discovery in such
datasets is not generally feasible using current methods that employ
probabilistic models. We propose an efficient method, GADEM, which combines
spaced dyads and an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. Candidate words
(four to six nucleotides) for constructing spaced dyads are prioritized by their 
degree of overrepresentation in the input sequence data. Spaced dyads are
converted into starting position weight matrices (PWMs). GADEM then employs a
genetic algorithm (GA), with an embedded EM algorithm to improve starting PWMs,
to guide the evolution of a population of spaced dyads toward one whose entropy
scores are more statistically significant. Spaced dyads whose entropy scores
reach a pre-specified significance threshold are declared motifs. GADEM performed
comparably with MEME on 500 sets of simulated "ChIP" sequences with embedded
known P53 binding sites. The major advantage of GADEM is its computational
efficiency on large ChIP datasets compared to competitors. We applied GADEM to
six genome-wide ChIP datasets. Approximately, 15 to 30 motifs of various lengths 
were identified in each dataset. Remarkably, without any prior motif information,
the expected known motif (e.g., P53 in P53 data) was identified every time. GADEM
discovered motifs of various lengths (6-40 bp) and characteristics in these
datasets containing from 0.5 to >13 million nucleotides with run times of 5 to 96
h. GADEM can be viewed as an extension of the well-known MEME algorithm and is an
efficient tool for de novo motif discovery in large-scale genome-wide data. The
GADEM software is available at
(www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/GADEM/).


PMCID: PMC2756050
PMID: 19193149 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):e142. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Evolutionary computation for discovery of composite transcription factor binding 
sites.

Fogel GB, Porto VW, Varga G, Dow ER, Craven AM, Powers DM, Harlow HB, Su EW,
Onyia JE, Su C.

Natural Selection, Inc, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Previous research demonstrated the use of evolutionary computation for the
discovery of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) in promoter regions
upstream of coexpressed genes. However, it remained unclear whether or not
composite TFBS elements, commonly found in higher organisms where two or more
TFBSs form functional complexes, could also be identified by using this approach.
Here, we present an important refinement of our previous algorithm and test the
identification of composite elements using NFAT/AP-1 as an example. We
demonstrate that by using appropriate existing parameters such as window size,
novel-scoring methods such as central bonusing and methods of self-adaptation to 
automatically adjust the variation operators during the evolutionary search,
TFBSs of different sizes and complexity can be identified as top solutions. Some 
of these solutions have known experimental relationships with NFAT/AP-1. We also 
indicate that even after properly tuning the model parameters, the choice of the 
appropriate window size has a significant effect on algorithm performance. We
believe that this improved algorithm will greatly augment TFBS discovery.


PMCID: PMC2588514
PMID: 18927103 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Nov 1;8 Suppl 7:S21.

A survey of DNA motif finding algorithms.

Das MK, Dai HK.

Computer Science Department, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma
74078, USA. mkdas@email.arizona.edu

BACKGROUND: Unraveling the mechanisms that regulate gene expression is a major
challenge in biology. An important task in this challenge is to identify
regulatory elements, especially the binding sites in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
for transcription factors. These binding sites are short DNA segments that are
called motifs. Recent advances in genome sequence availability and in
high-throughput gene expression analysis technologies have allowed for the
development of computational methods for motif finding. As a result, a large
number of motif finding algorithms have been implemented and applied to various
motif models over the past decade. This survey reviews the latest developments in
DNA motif finding algorithms. RESULTS: Earlier algorithms use promoter sequences 
of coregulated genes from single genome and search for statistically
overrepresented motifs. Recent algorithms are designed to use phylogenetic
footprinting or orthologous sequences and also an integrated approach where
promoter sequences of coregulated genes and phylogenetic footprinting are used.
All the algorithms studied have been reported to correctly detect the motifs that
have been previously detected by laboratory experimental approaches, and some
algorithms were able to find novel motifs. However, most of these motif finding
algorithms have been shown to work successfully in yeast and other lower
organisms, but perform significantly worse in higher organisms. CONCLUSION:
Despite considerable efforts to date, DNA motif finding remains a complex
challenge for biologists and computer scientists. Researchers have taken many
different approaches in developing motif discovery tools and the progress made in
this area of research is very encouraging. Performance comparison of different
motif finding tools and identification of the best tools have proven to be a
difficult task because tools are designed based on algorithms and motif models
that are diverse and complex and our incomplete understanding of the biology of
regulatory mechanism does not always provide adequate evaluation of underlying
algorithms over motif models.


PMCID: PMC2099490
PMID: 18047721 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(1):e1. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

CoMoDis: composite motif discovery in mammalian genomes.

Donaldson IJ, Göttgens B.

Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. ian.donaldson@manchester.ac.uk

Specificity of mammalian gene regulatory regions is achieved to a large extent
through the combinatorial binding of sets of transcription factors to distinct
binding sites, discrete combinations of which are often referred to as regulatory
modules. Identification and subsequent characterization of gene regulatory
modules will be a key step in assembling transcriptional regulatory networks from
gene expression profiling data, with the ultimate goal of unravelling the
regulatory codes that govern gene expression in various cell types. Here we
describe the new bioinformatics tool, Composite Motif Discovery (CoMoDis), which 
streamlines computational identification of novel regulatory modules starting
from a single seed motif. Seed motifs represent binding sites conserved across
mammalian species. CoMoDis facilitates novel motif discovery by automating the
extraction of DNA sequences flanking seed motifs and streamlining downstream
motif discovery using a variety of tools, including several that utilize
phylogenetic conservation criteria. CoMoDis is available at
http://hscl.cimr.cam.ac.uk/CoMoDis_portal.html.


PMCID: PMC1702496
PMID: 17130158 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

