1. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 May 28;5(5). [Epub ahead of print]

A platform for functional prediction and comparative analyses of transcription
factors of legumes and beyond.

Tran LS, Mochida K.

Unit Leader, RIKEN Plant Science Center, Signaling Pathway Research Unit,
Tsurumi, Yokohama, Japan. tran@psc.riken.jp.

Sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factors (TFs) are key molecular
switches that control many of the biological processes in a cell or organism.
Recent completion of the genomic sequences of soybean (Glycine max), Locus
japonicus and Medicago truncatula has enabled us to carry out large-scale data
mining to identify and annotate regulatory TFs for functional and comparative
genomics of the TF repertoires of these three major legumes in themselves or with
those of other species. The identified TFs of each legume were grouped in 61 TF
families, and these TFs all together were integrated into a so-called LegumeTFDB 
(http://legumetfdb.psc.riken.jp). Detailed annotations of TF genes can be
accessed at LegumeTFDB. Moreover, we included hyperlinks to expression data of a 
number of soybean TF genes, generated by high-throughput microarray analyses to
facilitate functional prediction. LegumeTFDB enables the search for all types of 
known abiotic stress responsive motifs as well as cis-motifs provided by the
PLACE database in promoter region of each of the TFs. Integration of expression
analysis, comparative sequence analysis and cis-motif and GO annotations provided
through this study would aid in systematic functional prediction of the legume
TFs. LegumeTFDB provides an important user-friendly public resource for
comparative genomics and understanding of transcriptional regulation in three
important legumes and beyond.


PMID: 20215877 [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Mar;5(3):255-7. Epub 2010 Mar 6.

Identification and prediction of abiotic stress responsive transcription factors 
involved in abiotic stress signaling in soybean.

Tran LS, Mochida K.

RIKEN Plant Science Center, Signaling Pathway Research Unit, Tsurumi, Yokohama,
Japan. tran@psc.riken.jp

Comment on:
    DNA Res. 2009 Dec;16(6):353-69.

Abiotic stresses such as extreme temperature, drought, high salinity, cold and
waterlogging often result in significant losses to the yields of economically
important crops such as soybean (Glycine max L.). Transcription factors (TFs)
which bind to DNA through specific cis-regulatory sequences either activate or
repress gene transcription have been reported to act as control switches in
stress signaling. Recent completion of the soybean genomic sequence has open wide
opportunities for large-scale identification and annotations of regulatory TFs in
soybean for functional studies. Within the soybean genome, we identified 5,035 TF
models which grouped into 61 families. Detailed annotations of soybean TF genes
can be accessed at SoybeanTFDB (soybeantfdb.psc.riken.jp). Moreover, we have
reported a new idea of high throughput prediction and selection of abiotic stress
responsive TFs based on the existence of known stress responsive cis-element(s)
located in the promoter regions of respective TFs and GO annotations. We,
therefore, have provided a basic platform for the genome-wide analysis of
regulatory mechanisms underlying abiotic stress responses and a reliable tool for
prediction and selection of stress responsive TFs for further functional studies 
and genetic engineering.


PMCID: PMC2881270
PMID: 20023425 [PubMed]

